---
title:  "Backpacking with an Eccentric Thai Monk"
layout: "post-no-feature"
description: "A character study mostly, with countryside landscapes in the background."
---

Ajahn Medhi said where we were going. Some place name in Thai, forgotten immediately. That wasn't why I was on the trip.

The two of us left March 11. I was decked out all in white, the uniform for wannabe monks. Even though I wasn't signing up to be a monk, that was my loaner social niche when villagers were around. We set out through the oil palm plantations adjacent to Nanachat, the retreat center. We were to cover 60 km, taking it easy, just 15 km each day, and spend a few days deep in the forest before returning to Nanachat by car. My valuables waved goodbye and waited loyally for our return to Nanachat. No need for money or a phone on this trip!

Soon enough, we stumbled into the territory of guerrilla ant warriors. Ajahn Medhi walked just a few meters further and picked the ants off himself. I, of course, started to immediately flick off my attackers, right in the middle of ant territory. After extricating myself from combat, Ajahn Medhi offered me a banana. "Then you won't think about the ant bites," he said. I gladly munched the banana and sipped the tea he'd foresightfully prepared. He closed the bananas out of sight in our pinto, a stack of metal bowls for carrying food. "Now you won't think about the bananas, either."

We walked further. Ajahn Medhi started teaching me Thai words and medicinal plants. The twigs from a certain tree make dozens of soft splinters when you chew them. A natural toothbrush! We chewed cloves to quench our hunger, and he showed some edible berries. He reminded me quite a few times of our walking formation before I got the hang of it. Staying 1.5 meters behind someone else isn't hard to understand, I just fell out of formation whenever my mind wandered. Ajahn Medhi gave me the name "Panna", which means "wisdom" in Pali, the language Buddha spoke. "Because you learn very quickly," he said.

Before nightfall we arrived to the house of Gun Sunthon, who had attended the programs of Ajahn Medhi at the monastery. I didn't get to know Gun Sunthon that well. His English was very limited and my Thai is nonexistent. His wife and children remained almost invisible. Rubber farming must bring a decent income; he had shiny and modern kitchen and bath, a two car garage, and so on. His house was maybe a bit richer than average, but I saw most Thai villagers enjoying a comfortable material standard.

We spent the night in the rubber grove of Gun Sunthon. I strung a cord between two trees, and hung an umbrella from it. I draped the top of a mosquito net over the umbrella, and tucked the bottom under the thin woven sleeping mat. Home sweet home!

We woke before dawn, and chanted. The melodies of Ajahn Medhi are not very standard, and I was always making mistakes and feeling shy and embarrassed. He seemed interested in volume than accuracy, and repeatedly encouraged me to chant louder, so the locals would know to bring us food.

Gun Sunthon brought us a feast, and we dutifully stuffed ourselves, knowing this was the only meal of the day. "I think you learn very much, yes?" asked Ajahn Medhi. I nodded. I was fuller with new experiences and information than with food.

As we struck camp, it emerged than Gun Sunthon would be coming with us. I'd been rather liking the exclusive attention of Ajahn Medhi, and I wasn't eager to share. Up until this point, I'd been in a daze of novelty. Now, I was disappointed.

As we walked, maybe once or twice each hour, passing villagers  would offer us drinks. They knew we only ate once per day, but the clever work around is to offer caloric drinks: soy milk, energy drinks, iced coffee, juice boxes. Thailand appears not to have any centralized trash collection. Ajahn Medhi wanted us to carry the packaging from our drinks until we had a chance to burn it. He flattened juice boxes and kept them for making books with the children in his summer camps. "What about the empty bottles of soy milk? Those are glass," I asked, testing the weight of my bag. "Don't worry about the future," he said, shouldering his bag, which was heavier. He's sixty, by the way. Gun Sunthon would discretely jettison bags of trash when Ajahn Medhi wasn't looking.

We encountered 30-year olds who had gone to Ajahn Medhi's summer camp in their teens. The villagers who didn't already know us were happy to see a monk. Sometimes we had more drinks than we could carry! Ajahn Medhi always accepted drinks, always refused money, and gave unneeded drinks to children we encountered. One time, we ran out of water. Just a couple minutes later, a truck carrying 10-liter water jugs parked in front of our resting place.

At one point, I realized I'd left behind my sleeping mat at our last rest. After that, I kept bugging Ajahn Medhia about it. "I'm worried that insects will crawl under the mosquito net," I would say to him. "Don't worry," he answered time and again.

We came to a lake. "Do you want to swim?" he asked. I jumped in without any further encouragement, and immensely enjoyed the refreshing water. I climbed out. "Come on! It's great," I said. "Gun Sunthon thinks it is dangerous for me," he answered. "Do you know how to swim?" I asked. "Yes," he said. "But Gun Sunthon doesn't. A lot of Thais don't. I explained to him that Americans like adventure and all know how to swim."

Whenever Ajahn Medhi wanted to stop for the day, Gun Sunthon insisted we keep going. At dark, we were still walking, and stopped to a few minutes rest in a large gravel area with ponds. We pooled the drinks and treats that the villagers had given us. Officially, monks don't eat after 12 o'clock, but yesterday I'd seen Ajahn Medhi discretely munch a banana. My eyes fixed on a donut, filled with a mysterious but very tasty paste. Today, however, it emerged that Gun Sunthon was on a diet, and Ajahn Medhi would strictly keep the monastic code. "Then I'm not eating either," I declared, mentally relinquishing the donut. "Why?" Ajahn Medhi asked. I didn't really know why. I mumbled something about following Thai customs. "You need enough energy to finish walking to the monastery where we'll sleep tonight," said Ajahn Medhi. Feeling quite awkward, and uncertain about protocol, I ate the donut.

Finally, we got a lift by motorcycle to the monastery where we'd planned to spend the night. There, we were greeted by Polyp Bhikku, one of the resident monks. Later on, he helped me remember his real name by writing it--but he wrote it in the Thai alphabet! So, in this story, Polyp Bhikku he shall remain.

Polyp Bhikku was very happy to talk with me, and Ajahn Medhi translated. Polyp Bhikku told me all about Thai history, and I asked questions about his monastery, which was an average village monastery and rather different than Nanachat.

The next morning he took me to meet his uncle, who was 95. Bright eyed and straight-backed, his uncle served us coffee and donuts, unassisted. Four birds tweeted in wooden cages hung from the veranda roof. The captive nearest me circled the cage madly. A few paces off, a chained gibbon moped about his tiny radius of freedom, looking forlorn and hopeless. Polyp Bhikku enthusiastically offered that if I stayed at his monastery, I could become a monk in a month. I said I would think about it.

The four of us--Ajahn Medhi, Gun Sunthon, Polyp Bhikku and me--set off, but almost immediately got sidetracked at a middle school. I taught the kids parts of the body in English, and led a simple meditation which Ajahn Medhi translated. "The teaching gave you a lot of energy," he observed as we left.

Ajahn Medhi had started to regularly ask if I didn't want to shave my head. He even generously offered that I could keep my beard if I wanted. At first I tried seriously to explain the different standards of hairstyle in different cultures, but after the 100th time that he asked me I started to answer with jokes. At our first rest, though, I let the three others each cut one lock of hair. Polyp walked back to his home monastery, and the three of us kept going.

It emerged that Ajahn Medhi was keeping a stoic mask on some quite severe back and foot pain. He started teaching me acupuncture. I experienced it as a foot massage, relaxing but not life changing. Ajahn Medhi said my work on his feet helped his back, also.

Most of that day, I kept my mind on my steps and avoided daydreaming as we walked. The day passed easily. "Do you want to eat something?" asked Ajahn Medhi after 12 o'clock. "Yes!" I declared vigorously. Gun Sunthon was steadfast in his diet. More for me, then. We stopped at a stream and I lay down in it to off, and clean myself and my clothes. Small fish nibbled on me painlessly, but I still found the sensation unpleasant and left the stream quickly enough. For a brief flash, Ajahn Medhi was angry at me because he thought I wanted to pee upstream from him, but apologized immediately when I explained I was just going to find shade. We camped in the banana grove of an agriculture school.

The next morning as we finished breakfast, Ajahn Medhi observed me eating and said, "You forget all your troubles when you eat sweets. Do you want some milk tea?"

In the evening, we were running out of time and energy for walking, but hadn't yet arrived to the deep jungle where we were supposed to camp. Some quick talking combined with the piety and generosity of the locals to produce a pickup truck, which took us the rest the way to the campsite. We stopped at the driver's house, and he for some reason gave the three of us four bottles of soy milk. Ajahn Medhi offered me the fourth, but I was genuinely not in need, and the Gun Sunthon was still dieting. I asked what to do with it, and Ajahn Medhi said to give it to the ants. I poured it out over some bushes next to the house. The driver continued his conversation without batting an eyelid at this, to him, completely normal behavior.

After the house, it was dark, so we had a nighttime jungle safari. The trees got bigger and the road got steeper the further we went. Ajahn Medhi was telling me that the road was impassibly muddy 10 months of the year, and my imagination filled with visions of 3 days in an exotic untamed jungle, learning medicinal plants and not walking.

We arrived to find 20 drunk Thais with a generator and big lights. Another group somewhere was singing karaoke. We pitched the mosquito nets in a vaguely quiet corner of the campground. Ajahn Medhi explained to me that he'd arranged a car to take me back to Nanachat tomorrow morning. If I wanted to stay in the jungle, then I could shave my head.

I was disappointed, because I was expecting more, and angry, because I felt threatened by the pressure to shave my head. I knew he wouldn't change his mind. Regardless, I made a feeble attempt at persuasion, and then went to the mediocre privacy of my mosquito net to think what to do. It was pretty obvious, though. I didn't want to shave my head to stay longer with someone who was pressuring me. Having come all this way, it would have been nice to stay in the jungle, but I didn't speak Thai, have monk status, have money or a phone, or have any idea where I was and I how I could get back on my own. A car trip it would be.

The next morning, Gun Sunthon, somebody I didn't know, a driver and I piled into the pickup of one of last night's revelers. It seems that everyone drives a pickup in the Thai countryside--probably they're useful for agricultural work. At the driver's house, we changed for the pickup of the guy I didn't know, who took us to the house of Gun Sunthon, whose wife cooked up a king-size breakfast while the two of us sat on the porch with beer and peanuts. I passed up the beer. After we dined, he took me back to Nanachat.

A week later, I realized that all my flights and my Indian visa were canceled, and that I'd probably be staying in Thailand for a few months. I saw Ajahn Medhi as I was passing his hut, headed somewhere else. I asked him if he didn't feel like shaving my head. Afterwards, he mashed curcuma in with mortar and pestle, and poured it on my head to disinfect my newly exposed scalp. He gave me my hair wrapped in a  banana leaf.

I brought the banana leaf with my hair up to the cave. God made the cave when he was tripping on shrooms. Long rock fins ring clearly if you knock on them. The footing is quite tricky, I was in flip flops and without a light, and man-eating crevices litter the area. I picked my way in, slowly and carefully. The forest sounds--the birds, the crickets, the like--you forget about them until they're walled away by rock, and then you notice their absence. A cool breeze encouraged me onwards, but I stopped before a tight-lipped cavity with a crevice for a floor. I always thought that bats slept during the day time, but now I know they half-squeak, half-chirp in their sleep. I threw the banana leaf with my hair into the crevice. It might have gotten stuck on a little rock ledge though, I'm not sure because it was dark. I left the cave, slowly and carefully as I'd come.

To wrap up, you may enjoy an excerpt from a book. The book is about a boy who falls in love with the ghost of a dead girl. The excerpt is about appreciating all of somebody, both the pleasant and unpleasant parts.

> Fragile, she was fragile and impermanent as salt. Like salt she would dissolve, lose her substance. And like salt she would flavor everything with a taste that was sharp and amniotic, disquieting and unmistakable. The gods saw. They saw what I had seen..., this girl with her piquant, pleasing oddity, her lips from which such strange utterances fell, such as when she had said to her mother, "He has the long face of a fish." They saw the dark and vibrant eyes in which all of her life was concentrated; they knew her erratic moods, her mysterious will, her loneliness which she could not explain to anyone, and her violent rage which had given me so much pain. And they knew more. Into her brain they went, and into her heart. They probed those elusive gardens, those nocturnal roads. They knew the black and sinister wells, the mazes, the sudden traps, and the floating, limpid, inaccessible evenings. Had they not simply recognized, in her, one of themselves? One who, through some cosmic accident, had come to reside on ... [Earth], lost like a star which finds itself, all at once, far from the others. And then the cry had gone out from ... [Heaven]. And they had crouched, anguished, watching this one who had fallen somehow from the skies. And then with slow and careful gestures, so as not to startle her, they had led her back, and she had departed with them.
>
> Sofia Samatar, "A Stranger in Olandria"