---
title:  "A Brief Reflection on Time"
layout: "post-no-feature"
description: "What do we spend most of our lives doing?"
---

What do we spend most of our lives doing? Don't cook your noodle; I already figured it out for you.

# The situation

| Time     | Task                               | Calculation                                    |
| -------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------- |
| 27 years | Sleeping                           | (80 yrs) &times; (8 hrs &frasl; day)           |
| 13 years | Eating, logistics, chores, hygiene | (80 yrs) &times; (4 hrs &frasl; day)           |
| 10 years | Breadwinning **or** homemaking     | (40 yrs) &times; (40 hrs &frasl; week)         |
| 10 years | Growing up                         | (20 yrs) &times; (12 hrs &frasl; day)          |
| 20 years | Everything else                    | 80 &minus; 27 &minus; 13 &minus; 10 &minus; 10 |

"Growing up" includes everything that children do that isn't already in another category.

# The point

If you only like things that you do in your free time, and your life looks like "The situation", then you'll be unhappy most of the time.

# What to do about it

Sleeping is the elephant in the room. If you can sleep for one less hour each night without feeling awful, and you keep it up for 27 years, then you're awake an additional 10,000 hours. According to Malcolm Gladwell, it takes 10,000 hours of practice of become world-class in a skill like chess or piano. Although his estimate is pretty rough, the take-away is that a one hour change in our sleeping habits is a big deal.

If you're born rich and never have to work a day in your life, congratulations. But it won't it help that much. The tasks you can't get rid of are, anyway, the majority of your time. Everyone is more or less equal, in that way. But. You can find joy and fulfillment in the stuff you just gotta do. You can also prevent your to-do list from growing any bigger than necessary. If you don't buy a car, then you don't have to earn the money for the car, insurance, and gas; and you don't have to pay the insurance bill, maintain the car, clean the car, and on and on.

I stayed up late one hour to write this post.